---
title: The Effect of First-Price vs. Second-Price Auctions on Display Advertising Markets
co-authors: draft available upon request
category: working paper
---

In 2019, the $60 billion display advertising market was shaken when Google transitioned from a second-price to first-price auction. Many reported rationales underpinned the change, including the increased transparency of the auction (an advertiser pays what they bid rather than relying on the auction partner to report the closing price), the facilitation of bidding across partners, greater allocative efficiency, higher revenues for publishers, and criticisms of Google's so-called last look algorithm which purportedly enabled its exchange users to outbid competitors from competing exchanges. Consistent with industry views, Despotakis et al. (2021) theorize that the change to the first-price auction, precipitated by header bidding, leads to higher clearing prices.<br>

Despite these beliefs, little empirical evidence exists to ascertain how the change affected display auction outcomes. Bidding became more complex as advertisers turned to various bid shading tools from different vendors to manage the complex task of optimizing their bids. Left unanswered is whether this change did lead to higher bid advertiser CPMs and greater publisher revenue.<br>

Leveraging exogenous variation in auction formats during the transition, together with reserve price experiments, I find that advertisers adjust quickly but systematically underbid, allocative efficiency does not improve, and publisher revenue declines under first-price auctions, particularly when reserve prices are set low. The observed bidding patterns can be rationalized by advertisers’ beliefs that reflect incomplete consideration of competitive responses across multiple ad exchanges, potentially due to decision complexity or limited information about competitors. These findings suggest a beneficial role for centralized or vertically integrated platforms, which may favor second-price auctions to mitigate market inefficiencies   a pattern consistent with Google’s search advertising and Meta’s advertising markets, where second-price auctions remain the standard.

